Day Zero Private Plugins (#68)
amplication/amplication-docs: day-zero/private-plugins.mdx

---
title: 'Private Plugins'
description: "Codify organizational standards using Amplication's Private Plugins"
icon: 'plug'
---

<Frame>
    <img src="/images/day-zero/plugins.png" />
</Frame>

**Plugins** are the driving force behind Amplication's code generation capabilities.
They provide the flexibility and extensibility needed to adapt Amplication to a wide range of technologies, languages, and frameworks.

> When you create a new resource from a Blueprint, it looks at the associated private plugins to understand the concrete steps needed to generate the code and configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create a new resource from a Blueprint, it looks at the associate plugins to understand the concrete steps needed to generate the code and configurations.
```

This event system provides plugins with comprehensive access to:

- **Catalog properties** for the specific resource being generated
- **Blueprint properties** of the specific resource
- Catalog and blueprint properties of all related resources (set through Blueprint relations)

This deep level of access allows you to create highly customized plugins that can adapt the code generation logic based on your organization's specific needs.
By combining the Blueprint Plugin events with various property access levels, you can precisely control how your software is generated.

<Note>
For detailed technical information about implementing plugins, visit our [Plugin Development Guide](/plugins/development).
</Note>

## How Plugins and Blueprints work together

Blueprints and plugins each serve a distinct purpose.
Together, they transform high-level specifications into production-ready code.

**Blueprints are declarative**.
They define the structure and relationships of your software ecosystem.
For example, a blueprint might specify:

- What entities and fields your service needs
- How these entities relate to each other

> - What business rules should be enforced

Reviewer: I dont think we need to talk about entities and fields here... at least not for now (we may get there sometime)
blueprints should describe the architecture components like APIs, workers, services, storage, queues, etc

- Which authentication requirements apply

**Plugins are imperative**.
They contain the specific logic that transforms blueprint definitions into actual code.
When a blueprint defines a customer data service, your plugin determines:

> - Which ORM library to use
> - How to implement email validation
> - What authentication mechanisms to apply
> - How to structure the generated code

Reviewer: this is too close to "business logic" - instead use: 

```suggestion
- Which ORM library to use
- How to build API endpoints
- How to do caching
- How to structure the generated code
```

<Note>
**Example**: A Blueprint might specify, "We need a standard Spring Boot resource with a user authentication module." A plugin knows *how* to scaffold the Java classes, set up Spring Security configurations, implement JWT authentication, configure Spring AOP for logging, and set up Maven/Gradle build pipelines.
</Note>

## How Private Plugins Solve Drift & Maintenance Challenges

> One of the biggest headaches for platform teams is **managing technical debt** across repositories, especially when managing multiple resources that share common plugins.

Reviewer: add something about "managing versions of plugins" "releasing new version" "use versioning"...

> Private Plugins, paired with Amplication's blueprint-driven code generation, help teams stay in sync through automated coordination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins, paired with Amplication's blueprint-driven code generation, help teams stay in sync through automated coordination.
```

> When you update a plugin that's used across multiple blueprints, Amplication helps you maintain consistency by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you update and release a new version of a plugin that's used across multiple blueprints, Amplication helps you maintain consistency by:
```

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Automated Update Notifications" icon="bell" href="/day-two/automated-alerts">
    Resources using the modified plugin receive immediate alerts, helping teams track which services need attention.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Streamlined Updates via PRs" icon="code-pull-request" href="/day-two/trigger-prs-for-updated-standards">
    Amplication automatically generates pull requests across all affected resources, making it easy to review and apply plugin changes at scale.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## A Private Plugin Example

Let's say you have a Blueprint defining an `Order` entity.
You can create a private plugin that:

<Steps>
  <Step title="Intercept Code Generation">
    Intercepts the code generation process for `Order` entities
  </Step>
  <Step title="Generate Order IDs">
    Adds custom code to automatically generate unique order IDs based on your company's specific algorithm
  </Step>
  <Step title="Integrate Auditing">
    Integrates with your internal auditing service to log all `Order` creation events
  </Step>

> </Steps>

Reviewer: you should not talk about "order" entity
